---
title: Lecture 7
week: 4
lecture_date: 2022-09-26
author: Siddarth Krishnamoorthy
layout: lecture
parent: Lecture Notes
---

{: .note }
Heya! Matt here. This lecture note covers the entire [intro slide deck](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1RG2eC0hrYz8_ExI0D-ocvvmDzxgNND8N/edit#slide=id.p1)). If you have feedback on how this is done, please let me know!

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc }

{:toc}
- dummy item

## Data Palooza
In the next few lectures, we will be covering the internals of how many languages manage data (including types, variables and values). We won't be covering specific languages, but will instead look at patterns that occur across many languages. Before that, let's do a brief introduction of some of the terms we will be discussing.
### Variables and Values
A variable is the symbolic name associated with a location that contains a value or a pointer. A value is a piece of data with a type (usually) that is either referred to by a variable, or computed by a program. For a concrete example, consider the statement
```python
a = 42
```
Here `a` is a variable, and `42` is a value.

What are the facets that make up a variable?
- names: variables almost always have a name
- types: a variable may (or may not) have a type associated with it
- values: a variable stores a value (and its type)
- binding: how a variable is connected to its current value
- storage: the slot of memory that stores the value associated with the variable
- lifetime: the timeframe over which a variable exists
- scope: when/where a variable is accessible by code
- mutability: can a variable's value be changed?

What are the facets that make up a value?
- ~~names: variables almost always have a name~~
- types: a value **will always** have a type associated with it
- ~~values: a variable stores a value (and its type)~~
- ~~binding: how a variable is connected to its current value~~
- storage: the slot of memory that stores the value
- lifetime: the timeframe over which a value exists
- ~~scope: when/where a variable is accessible by code~~
- mutability: can a value be changed?

{: .note }
Lifetime and scope seem similar, but they are **not** the same. Lifetime refers to the *existance* of the variable, whereas scope refers to the *accessibility* of a variable. It is entirely possible for a variable to be out-of-scope but still be alive.
