---
title: Lecture 13 and 14
week: 7
lecture_date: 2022-11-07 and 2022-11-09
author: Siddarth Krishnamoorthy
layout: lecture
parent: Lecture Notes
---

{: .note }
Hi! Siddarth here. This lecture note covers Garbage Collection from [Data Palooza](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/18FaEpHZgssxTS-TNSs-VJDghLS1v5X1N/) and the first 20 slides from [Function Palooza](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1TciwPfagx56NsYnfa-xTXI1BYTrsAdAy/edit?rtpof=true). We continue from [last week]({{site.baseurl}}/lectures/09).

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc }

{:toc}
- dummy item

## Parameter Passing Semantics
In this next section we’re going to learn about parameter passing semantics. Parameter passing semantics is the term we use to describe the underlying mechanisms that languages use to  pass arguments (e.g., `x+y`) to functions (e.g., `f(x+y)`). As it turns out this concept is closely related to the concept of binding semantics. The 4 most common approaches are:
* Pass by Value - The formal parameter gets a copy of the argument's value/object 
* Pass by Reference - The formal parameter is an alias for the argument's value/object
* Pass by Object Reference - The formal parameter is a pointer to the argument's value/object
* Pass by Name - The parameter points to an expression graph that represents the argument

### Pass by Value
In pass by value, each argument is first evaluated to get a value, and a copy of the value is then passed to the function for local use.
For example, consider the following snippet of code.
```cpp
void stinkify(string n) {
  string t = n + " stinks!";
  n = t;
} 

int main() {
  string s = "Devan";


  stinkify(s);
  cout << s; // prints 'Devan'
}
```
Notice that in line 3, when we reassign `n=t`, this modifies the local copy, not the original argument itself. All changes to the copy are discarded once the function ends.

### Pass by Reference
In pass by reference, the address of the argument is (secretly) passed on to the function. In the called function, all reads/writes to the parameter are directed to the data at the *original* address.
For a more concrete example, consider the following snippet of code.
```cpp
void stinkify(string &n) {
  string t = n + " stinks!";
  n = t;
}

int main() {
  string s = "Devan";


  stinkify(s);
  cout << s; // prints 'Devan stinks!'
}
```
All changes to reference parameters modify the original value/object (using the implicitly passed in address). 

#### Aliasing
Aliasing occurs when two parameters unknowingly refer to the same value/object and unintentionally modify it. This can cause subtle and difficult to find bugs in code. For example, consider the following snippet of code.
```cpp
void filter(set<int> &in
            set<int> &out) {
  out.clear();
  for (auto x: in)
    if (is_prime(x)) out.insert(x);
}

int main() {
  set<int> a;
  a.insert(5);
  a.insert(6);
  a.insert(7);
  filter(a, a);
}
```
Our intent in the code is to clear the `out` variable, and insert in it the values in `in` that are prime. But since we pass `a` to both parameters, `in` and `out` refer to the same variable! So `out.clear()` clears the input `a` before it can be processed!

### Pass by Object Reference
In pass by object reference, all values/objects are passed by pointer to the called function. The function itself can use the pointer to read/mutate the pointed-to argument.
```python
class Nerd:
 def __init__(self,name,iq):
  self.name = name
  self.iq = iq

 def study(self):
  self.iq = self.iq + 50

... 

def be_a_nerd(n):
  n.study();

def main():
  a = Nerd("Alwyn",150)
  be_a_nerd(a);
  print(a.iq()); // 200
```
{: .note }
Pass by object reference can just be seen as a special case of pass by value, since we're just passing the value of the pointer (object reference) to the function.

Note that when we pass by object reference, we *cannot* use assignment to change the value of the original value/object. Consider the following example.
```python
def stinkify(n):
  t = n + " stinks!";
  n = t;

def main(): 
  s = "Devan";

  stinkify(s);
  print(s); # prints 'Devan'
```
The assignment in line 3 does *not* affect the original object, it just changes the local object reference `n`. The takeaway is that assignments of object references never change the passed-in value/object. They just change where the local object reference points to! This contrasts with passing by reference, where assignment *can* change the original value. So, in a language that uses Object References like Java or Python, your function can either return a new object with relevant changes (e.g., `x = stinkify(x)`), or use mutator functions.

### Pass by Name/Need
In pass by name, each parameter is bound to a pointer that points to an expression graph (a "thunk") which can be used to compute the passed-in argument's value. In pass-by-name, a thunk is typically implemented as a lambda function that can be called to evaluate the full expression graph and produce a concrete result when it's needed. This is done *lazily*, meaning evaluations are only done when the result is actually needed (for example during printing).

In pass-by-need, once an expression graph is evaluated, the computed result is memoized (cached) to prevent repeat computation.

### Classify that language
Consider the following program, which *only* prints `The result is: 1`. What is the parameter passing strategy used by the lanauge?
```scala
def addIfFirstEven(a: => Int, b: => Int): Int = 
  var sum = a 
  if (a % 2 == 0)
    sum += b
  return sum

def triple(x: Int): Int =
   var trip: Int = x*3
   println("3*"+x+" is: "+trip)
   return trip

object Main {
 def main(args: Array[String]): Unit =
   var v1 = 1
   var v2 = 2
   var result = addIfFirstEven(v1,triple(v2))
   println("The result is: "+result)
}
```
Notice that since, the `triple(v2)` expression is never run, the language is using pass by name!
{: .note }
The language is Scala (used in [Spark](https://spark.apache.org/)).

## Error handling
In addition to returning values (e.g., the square root of a number) functions often need to communicate error conditions. Early on, languages had no real support for this, so folks would just roll their own solutions. For instance, functions used enums (`success`, `failure`) or sentinel values (`-1`, `null`, or `false`) to report results/errors. This created a hodge-podge of different error-handling approaches, and introduced its own set of bugs and issues. So as languages have evolved, they've started providing explicit mechanisms for dealing with results and errors.

Before proceeding further, let's define some terms.
* **Bug** - A flaw in a program's logic – the only solution is aborting execution and fixing the bug.
* **Unrecoverable errors** - Non-bug errors where recovery is impossible, and the program must shut down
* **Recoverable errors** - Non-bug errors where recovery is possible, and the program may continue executing
* **Result** - An indication of the outcome/status of an operation.

There are a few error handling paradigms followed by most languages. Note that languages can use more than one paradigm.
* Roll your own - The programmer must "roll their own" handling, like defining enumerated types (success,error) to communicate results. This is usually found in older languages like C or FORTRAN.
* Error Objects - Error objects are used to return an explicit error result from a function to its caller, independent of any valid return value. This is used by GoLang.
* Optional Objects - An "Optional" object can be used by a function to return a single result that can represent either a valid value or a generic failure condition.
* Result Objects - A "Result" object can be used by a function to return a single result that can represent either a valid value or a specific Error Object.
* Assertions/Conditions - An assertion clause checks whether a required condition is true, and immediately exits the program if it is not. This is found in most languages.
* Exceptions and Panics - A function `f` may *throw an exception* which exits `f` and all calling functions until the exception is explicitly "caught" and handled by a calling function or the program terminates.

### Error objects
Error objects are language-specific objects used to return an explicit error result from a function to its caller, independent of any valid return value. Languages with error objects provide a built-in error class to handle common errors. Error objects are returned along with a function's result as a separate return value.
```go
// GoLang: Example using error objects

func circArea(rad float32) (float32, error) {
  if rad >= 0 {
    return math.Pi*rad*rad, nil
  } else {
    return 0, errors.New("Negative radius")
  }
}

func cost(rad float32, cost_per_sqft float32) 
         (float32, error) {
  area, err := circArea(rad)
  if err != nil { return 0, err }
  return cost_per_sqft * area, nil
}
```
In most languages, you can define custom error classes with fields that are specific to your error condition. And you can even wrap (nest) errors to provide more context.

### Optionals
An "Optional" object can be used by a function to return a single result that can represent either a valid value or a generic failure. You can think of an optional as a struct that holds two items: a value and a Boolean indicating whether the value is valid. Since you only have a simple Boolean to indicate success/failure (not a detailed error description), you only want to use optional if there's an obvious, single failure mode.
```cpp
// C++ optional example

std::optional<float> divide(float a, float b) {
  if (b == 0)  
    return std::nullopt;  // error result!  
  else
    return std::optional(a/b); 
}

int main() {
 auto result = divide(10.0,0);
 if (result)
    cout << "a/b is equal to " << *result;
 else 
    cout << "Error during division!";
}
```

### Result variables
A "Result" object can be used by a function to return a single result that can represent either a valid value or a distinct error. A "Result" object can be used by a function to return a single result that can represent either a valid value or a distinct error. Since a Result contains a full Error object, you can use it when there are multiple distinct failure modes that need to be distinguished and handled differently. Result objects are typically used for recoverable errors and results.
```swift
// Swift example of returning Result objects
enum ArithmeticError: Error {
  case divisionByZero
  // add other error types here as necessary
}

func my_div(x: Double, y: Double) -> 
       Result<Double, ArithmeticError> {
  if y == 0  { return .failure(.divisionByZero) }
  else       { return .success(x / y) }
}

let result = my_div(x:10, y: 0)
switch result {
  case .success(let number):
    print("Successful division: ", number)
  case .failure(let error):
    dealWithTheError(error)
}
```

### Assertions
An assertion is a statement/clause inserted into a program that verifies assumptions about your program's state (its variables) that must be true for correct execution. We typically use assertions to verify one of three things: invariants, preconditions or postconditions.
* **Precondition** - A precondition is something that must be true at the start of a function for it to work correctly.
* **Postcondition** - A postcondition is something that the function guarantees is true once it finishes.
* **Invariant** - An invariant is a condition that is expected to be true across a function or class's execution.

For a concrete example of an assertion, consider the following snippet of C++ code.
```cpp
// C++ stack class
class IntStack {
public:
  Stack(int max_size) { 
    array_ = new int[max_size];         
    free_slots_ = max_size_ = max_size;
    used_slots_ = 0;
  }
  void push(int val) {
    assert(used_slots_ + open_slots_ == max_size_);
    array_[used_slots_] = val;
    ++used_slots_;
    --open_slots_;
    assert(used_slots_ + open_slots_ == max_size_);
  }
  ...
};
```
Here, we check for an invariant inside `push` (the sum of `used_slots` and `open_slots` must always equal the stack's maximum size). While it's impossible to maintain an invariant across every line of code, you should maintain invariants at the function level.

### Exception
With other error handling approaches, error checking is woven directly into the code, making it harder to understand the core business logic.  With exception handling, we separate the handling of exceptional situations/unexpected errors from the core problem-solving logic of our program. Thus, errors are communicated and handled independently of the mainline logic. This allows us to create more readable code that focuses on the problem we're trying to solve and isn't littered with extraneous error checks that complicate the code.

There are two participants with exception handling: a catcher and a thrower. The catcher has two parts:
* A block of code that "tries" to complete one or more operations that might result in an unexpected error.
* An "exception handler" that runs iff an error occurs during the tried operations, and deals with the error.

```cpp
void f() {
  try {
    g();
    h();
    i();
  }
  catch (Exception &e) {
    deal_with_issue(e);
  }
}
```
In the above example, if any of the functions `g`, `h` or `i` have an error, the `deal_with_issue` method will be called to handle the error.

The thrower is a function that performs an operation that might result in an error. If an error occurs, the thrower creates an exception object containing details about the error, and "throws" it to the exception handler to deal with.
```cpp
void h() {
  // Next command might fail!
  if (some_operation() == failure)
    ...

  op_succeeded_so_do_other_stuff();
  do_even_more_stuff();
  finish_with_more_stuff();
}
```

#### Exception Handling Flow
In the above example, when an exception is thrown (say in `h`), the code executes all instructions until the point where the exception is thrown, and then control flow jumps to the `catch` clause. When no exception is thrown, the `catch` clause is entirely skipped.
```cpp
void f() {
  try {
    g();
    h();
    i();
  }
  catch (Exception &e) {
    deal_with_issue(e);
  }
}
```

An exception may be thrown an arbitrary number of levels down from the catcher, and will automatically terminate every intervening function on its way back to the handler! For instance, in the following example, when an exception is thrown in `h`, the `some_more_code` method in `g` won't execute.
```cpp
void h() {
  if (some_op() == failure)
    throw runtime_error("deets");

  do_other_stuff();
}
void g() {
  some_intermediate_code();
  h();
  some_more_code();
}
void f() {
  try {
    cout << "Before!\n";
    g();
    cout << "After!\n";
  }
  catch (Exception &e) {
    deal_with_issue(e);
  }
}
```

Furthermore, an exception handler can specify exactly what type of exception(s) it handles. A thrown exception will be directed to the closest handler (in the call stack) that covers its exception type.
```cpp
void f() {
  try {
    g();
  }
  catch (overflow_error &e) {
    deal_with_arithmetic_overflow(e);
  }
  catch (out_of_range &e) {
    deal_with_out_of_range_error(e);
  }
}
```

If an exception is thrown for which there is no compatible handler, the program will just terminate. This is the equivalent of a "panic" which basically terminates the program when an unhandle-able error occurs.

#### Exception Objects
An exception is an object with one or more fields which describe an exceptional situation. At a minimum, every exception has a way to get a description of the problem that occurred, e.g., "division by zero." But programmers can also use subclassing to create their own exception classes and encode other relevant info.
```cpp
class WebsiteException: 
           public std::exception {
public:
 WebsiteException(const string& website,
                  int http_error) {
    website_ = website;
    http_error_code_ = http_error;
 }
        
 string get_website_url() const 
    { return website_; }
 string get_http_error_code () const 
    { return http_error_code_; }
 const char* what() const noexcept 
    { return "Unable to connect to URL\n";}
private:
  string website_;
  int http_error_code_; // eg, 404 access denied
};
...
int func()
{
  HttpStatus s = connect(url);
  if (s != OK)
    throw WebsiteException(url, s.getHTTPStatus());
}
```

Different types of exceptions are derived from more basic types of exceptions. So if you want to create a catch-all handler, you can have it specify a (more) basic exception class. That handler will deal with the base exception type and all of its subclassed exceptions.

#### Finally
Some languages, like Java, introduced a third component to a catcher to make error handling simpler. This third component is called a `finally` block and it's guaranteed to run whether the try block succeeds or throws. This enables you to place your "cleanup" code in a single place, yet guarantee it runs in both error and success situations. Here is an example of some code that uses `finally` in Java.
```java
// Java "finally" block
public class FileSaver {
  public void saveDataToFile(String filename, 
				String data) {
    FileWriter writer = null;
    try {
      // Next 2 lines might throw IOExceptions
      writer = new FileWriter(filename);
      writer.write(data); 
    } 
    catch (IOException e) {
      e.printStackTrace();  // debug info
    } 
    finally {
      if (writer != null)
        writer.close();
    }
  }
}
```
In the above example, the code in the `finally` block always executes, regardless of whether or not the code in the `try` block throws an exception.

#### Exceptions and memory safety
Exceptions can create all sorts of bugs if not used appropriately. To see how that can happen, consider the following example in C++.
```cpp
void h() {
  if (some_op() == failure)
    throw runtime_error("deets");

  do_other_stuff();
}
void g() {
  int* arr = new int[100];
  h();
  // code uses array here... 
  delete[] arr;
}
void f() {
  try {
    g();
  }
  catch (Exception &e) {
    deal_with_issue(e);
  }
}
```
What happens if `h` throws a `runtime_error`? Notice that in `g`, the memory allocated using `new` is never freed, thus causing a memory leak!So you should be wary of using exceptions in languages *without* automatic memory management (like C++).
{: .note }
In languages like C++, you can still use exceptions without worrying about memory leaks if you use [Smart pointers](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory).

Some languages like Java force you to annotate functions which throw exceptions with a special token (in the case of Java, you must annotate functions that throw with the `throws` keyword). This way, you will know if you need to catch an exception when you call a function.
```java
// Java functions must explicitly 
// declare their exceptions!
public class MyClass {
  void h() throws IOException {
    if (some_op() == fail_to_open_file)
      throw new IOException("File mising!");
  }
    
  void g() throws IOException {
    h();
    // other code
  }
    
  public void f() {
    try {
      g();
    }
    catch(IOException e) {
      deal_with_issue(e);
    }
  }
}
```

{: .note }
Another big drawback of exceptions is that they are extremely slow when they are thrown!

Here are a few more examples of exceptions in other languages.
* **Swift**
```swift
// Swift exception handling example
enum VendErr: Error {   
    case invalidSelection(selection: String)
    case invalidBill(billValue: Int)
}

class VendingMachine { 
  var dollarsInserted: Int

  func insertMoney(dollars: Int) throws {
    if (dollars != 1 && dollars != 5 && dollars != 10) 
      { throw VendErr.invalidBill(billValue: dollars) }
    dollarsInserted += dollars 
  }

  func buyItem(itemCode: String) throws -> String {
     if itemCode == "A1" && dollarsInserted >= 2 {
        dollarsInserted -= 2 
        return "KitKat"
    } 
    // We got nuthin left!
    throw VendErr.invalidSelection(selection: itemCode)
  } 
}
...
var vm = VendingMachine()
do {
    try vm.insertMoney(dollars:10);
    let item = try vm.buyItem(itemCode: "b3");
    print("Ate \(item). Yum!")
} catch VendErr.invalidSelection {
    print("Invalid Selection.")
} catch VendErr.invalidBill(let billSize) {
    print("Counterfeit $\(billSize) bill!")
}
```
* **Python**
```python
# python exception handling example
def getNumbers(howMany): 
  if howMany < 0:   
    raise ValueError("howMany was < 0")
  return [str(i) for i in range(howMany)]

def saveNums(filename, howMany): 
  try:   
    f = open(filename, "w")   
    try:
       nums = getNumbers(howMany)
       f.write(' '.join(nums))
    except ValueError as ve: 
       print("Had a value error:",ve)
    except IOError:
      print("Badness saving to file")   
    finally:
      f.close()
  except OSError:   
     print("Badness opening file")
```

#### Exception handling guarantees
As we've seen, exception handling can be tricky and difficult to understand. As such, engineers have produced some rules of thumb to ensure exceptions are used in a safe manner. When writing a function, always make sure you meet one of the following guarantees:
* No throw guarantee: A function guarantees it will not throw an exception. If an exception occurs in/below the function, it will handle it internally, and not throw. For example, this is required of destructors, functions that deallocate memory, swapping functions, etc.
* Strong exception guarantee: If a function throws an exception, it guarantees that the program's state will be "rolled-back" to the state just before the function call. For example, `vec.push_back()` ensures the vector doesn't change if the `push_back()` operation fails.
* Basic exception guarantee: If a function throws an exception, it leaves the program in a valid state (no resources are leaked, and all invariants are intact). Here, state may not be rolled back, but at least the program can continue running.

### Panics
Like an exception, a panic is used to abort execution due to an exceptional situation which cannot be recovered from (e.g., an unrecoverable error). Essentially, you can think of a panic as an exception which is never caught, and thus which causes the program to terminate. Panics contain both an error message and a stack trace to provide the programmer with context as to why the software failed.

Here is an example of a panic in C#.
```cs
// C# FailFast panic
class WorstCaseScenario
{
  public void someFunc()
  {
    if (somethingUnrecoverableHappens())
      Environment.FailFast("A catastrophic failure has occurred.");
  }
}
```

### Classify that language
Consider the following program, which computes `a/b` given two values `a` and `b`. What result or error handling approach does this language use?
```rust
use std::io::{Error, ErrorKind};

fn my_div(a:f64, b:f64) -> Result<f64, Error> {
  if b != 0.0 { Ok(a/b) }
  else { Err(Error::new(ErrorKind::Other, 
             "You divided a by zero!"))  }
}

fn main() {
  match my_div(50.0,20.0) {
    Ok(number) => println!("Got {}",number),
    Err(e) => println!("Got an error {}",e),
  };
  match my_div(10.0,0.0) {
    Ok(number) => println!("Got {}",number),
    Err(e) => println!("Got an error {}",e),
  };
}
```
This is an example of a language using result variables for error handling. The language lets you specify either a value or an error type/message for a failure.
{: .note }
The language is actually Rust!

## First Class Functions
In languages with First Class Functions:
* Functions can be passed/returned to/from other functions
* Variables can be assigned to functions
* Functions can be stored in data structures
* Functions can be compared for equality
* Functions can be expressed as anonymous, literal values

Functions here are called "first-class citizens" because they are data objects and can be maniupulated like any other data in a program.

Here are some examples of first class functions in some languages:
* C++

In C++, first-class functions are implemented with function pointers.
```cpp
int square(int val) { return val * val; }
int fivex(int val) { return val * 5; }

using IntToIntFuncPtr = int (*)(int val);

void apply(IntToIntFuncPtr f, int val) {
  cout << "f(" << val << ") is " << f(val) << endl;
}

IntToIntFuncPtr pickAFunc(int r) {
  if (r == 0) return square;
         else return fivex;
}

int main() {
 IntToIntFuncPtr f = pickAFunc(rand() % 2);
  if (f == square) cout << "Picked square\n";
               else cout << "Picked fivex\n";
  apply(f, 10);
}
```

* Go

```golang
func square(val int) int { return val * val }
func fivex(val int) int  { return val * 5 }

type IntToIntFuncPtr func(int) int

func apply(f IntToIntFuncPtr, val int) {
  fmt.Println("f(", val, ") is ", f(val))
}

func pickAFunc(r int) IntToIntFuncPtr {
  if r == 0 {
    return square
  } else {
    return fivex
  }
}

func main() {
  var f = pickAFunc(rand.Intn(2))
  if f != nil {
    apply(f, 10)
  }
}
```

### Anonymous (Lambda) Functions
A lambda function is a function that does not have a function name – it's anonymous. Typically we pass a lambda function as an argument to another function or store it in a variable. Lambdas are used when a short, temporary function is needed just once in a program, and it doesn't make sense to define a general-purpose named function.

Every lambda has three different parts:
* Free Variables to Capture - What variables defined outside the lambda function should be available for use in the lambda function when it is later called.
* Parameters & Return Type - What parameters does the lambda function take and what type of data does it return.
* Function Body - The body of the lambda function that performs its operations.

### Capture by Value
As the name suggests, in capture by value, only the values of the free variables are captured by the lambda. This means that any changes made to the captured variable inside the lambda will not be reflected outside it. Here is an example of capture by value in C++.
```cpp
// C++ lambda function
auto create_lambda_func() {
  int m = 5;  
  int b = 3;
  return [m,b](int x) -> int { return m*x + b; };
}

int main() {
  auto slope_intercept = create_lambda_func();
  cout << "5*100 + 3 is: " << slope_intercept(100);
}
```

### Capture by Reference
C++ (and some other languages) can also capture values by reference. Here is an example.
```cpp
// C++ lambda function – capture by reference
auto fun_with_lambdas() {
  int q = 0;  
  auto changer = [&q](int x) { q = x; };
  changer(5);
  cout << "q is now: " << q; // Outputs "q is now: 5"
  return changer;
}

int main() {
  auto f = fun_with_lambdas();
}
```

### Capture by Environment
In capture by environment, an object reference to the *lexical environment* where the lambda was created is added to the closure. The *lexical environment* is a data structure that holds a mapping between every in-scope variable and its value. That includes all variables in the current activation record (locals, statics), and all global variables. Python uses capture by environment semantics. Here is an example.
```python
def foo():
  q = 5
  f = lambda x: print("q*x is: ", q*x)
  f(10)
```
When you define the lambda, it creates a closure containing:
* the lambda function itself
* an object reference to the current lexical environment

When running the lambda, it looks up each free variable in the lexical environments to obtain its value. Now consider this slightly modified code.
```python
def foo():
  q = 5
  f = lambda x: print("q*x is: ", q*x)
  f(10) # outputs "q*x is: 50"
  q = q + 1
  f(10) # outputs "q*x is: 60"
```
This outputs both `50` and `60`. This is because even though the lambda was defined when `q = 5`, when the lambda runs, it looks up the latest value of the variable in the lexical environment, and therefore outputs `60`.

### Classify that language
Consider the following program which prints out `7`. What capturing strategy does this language employ?
```js
function make_lambda() {
 let puppies = 4;

 // define lambda function with 1 param
 temp = function (kittens) { 
   s = "pup"
   s = s + "pies + kit"
   s = s + "tens" 

   // eval(s) interprets s as if it were a
   // regular statement in the program
   return eval(s)
  }
  return temp
}

f = make_lambda()
console.log(f(3))
```

Notice that our lambda function never explicitly references `puppies`! So the language can't be capturing by value or reference, so it must use capture by environment. The lambda then constructs the string `"puppies + kittens"`. Then the `eval` function takes it as a parameter and treats it as code, and runs it! So running `puppies+kittens` computes `4+3` and the code outputs `7`.
{: .note }
The language is actually JavaScript!

## Polymorphism
Polymorphism is a technique where we define a function or class that is able to operate on multiple different types of values. Our goal is to express algorithms with minimal assumptions about the types of data they operate on, making them as interoperable as possible - ideally without losing computing efficiency. For example, rather than creating a class to represent a linked list of strings, and a separate class for a linked list of ints, we create a single polymorphic linked list class that can hold a list of any type of value.

Polymorphism is generally implemented differently in statically and dynamically-typed languages.

There are three primary types of polymorphism in statically typed languages:
* Subtype Polymorphism: 
* Ad-hoc Polymorphism: We define specialized versions of the same function for each type we want to support – also known as "overloading".
* Parametric Polymorphism: We define a single version of a function or class that can operate on many, potentially unrelated types.

### Subtype Polymorphism
In subtype polymorphism, a function is designed to operate on objects of a base class B (e.g., Shape) and on objects of all subclasses derived from B (e.g. Circles). We will cover this in-depth in the OOP section, so we will just give a simple example for now.
```cpp
class Shape {...}
class Square: public Shape {...}
class Circle: public Shape {...}

void processShape(Shape& s) 
 { ... }

Circle c(10);
processShape(c);
Square s(5);
processShape(s);
```

### Ad-hoc Polymorphism
With ad-hoc polymorphism we define specialized versions of a function for each type of object we wish it to support. The language decides which version of the function to call based on the types of the arguments. This kind of thing is used all the time in C++ for operator overloading!
```cpp
bool greater(Dog a, Dog b) {
  return a.bark() > b.bark();
}
bool greater(Student a, Student b) {
  return a.gpa() > b.gpa();
}
int main() {
  Dog spot, penny;
  if (greater(spot, penny))
    cout << "Spot wins!\n";

  Student carey, david;
  if (greater(carey, david))
    cout << "Carey wins!\n";
}
```
{: .note }
Ad-hoc polymorphism isn't possible in dynamically typed languages. This is because we usually don't specify types for formal parameters in dynamic languages, there's no way to define multiple versions of a function with different parameter types. Instead, such languages can specialise behaviour using [Type reflection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflective_programming).

### Parametric Polymorphism
With parametric polymorphism, we define a single, parameterized version of a class or function that can operate on many, potentially unrelated types. Parameteric polymorphism is implemented in two major ways, templates or generics. The syntax for the two may look similar, but they're implemented in entirely different ways - with big implications!


#### Templates
In a language (like C++) that uses the template approach, each time you use the template with a different type the compiler generates a concrete version of the template function/class by substituting in the type parameter. Then it just compiles the newly-generated functions/classes as if they were never templated in the first place. Any operations you use in your templated code must be supported by the types being templated. Here is an example in C++.
```cpp
template <typename T>
void takeANap(T &x) {
  x.sleep();
}
class Dog {
public:
  void sleep() { ... }
};

class Person {
public:
  void sleep() { ... }
};
...
int main() {
  Dog puppers;
  takeANap(puppers); // OK!

  Person carey;
  takeANap(carey); // OK!

  string val; 
  takeANap(val); // error: no member named 'sleep' in 'string'
}
```
In the above example, since `takeANap` uses the `sleep()` method internally, only types that support `sleep()` can be used. If you try to use a type that doesn't support `sleep()`, you'll get a compile time error.

When you create a new template, e.g., vector<string>, does the compiler ensure the templated code is type-safe? If so, how?

Yes – since the compiler basically generates a concrete version of the function/class with the specified type, and the compiles it as it would any other class, type safety is guaranteed

Is templated code more or less run-time efficient than an equivalent function that doesn't use templates, but otherwise has the same logic? Why?

Both implementations have the same runtime efficiency since a custom version of the function/class is generated for each distinct type, and it can be optimized just as if you wrote a dedicated function for that type.

{: .note }
C-style macros are sort of the OG templates. The pre-processor would basically do a textual search-and-replace of the arguments, the compiler doesn't generate a new function for each parameterized type.
```cpp
// C macros used to implement template-like functionality

#define swap(T  ,a,b) { T   temp; temp = a; a = b; b = temp; }

int main() {
 int p = 5, q = 6;
 swap(int,p,q);
  
 std::string s = "foo", t = "bar";
 swap(std::string, s, t);
}
```

#### Generics
In a language that uses generics, each generic class/function is compiled on its own, independent of any code that might later use it. And because of this, a simple generic's code can not make any assumptions about what types it might be used with! When you later compile code that uses the generic the compiler will ensure the code uses the generic's interfaces correctly. In a language that uses generics, each generic class/function is compiled on its own, independent of any code that might later use it. Because of this a simple generic's code *cannot* make any assumptions about what types it might be used with. Consider the following example in C#.
```cs
// C# generic container

class HoldItems<T> {
  public void add(T val)
    { arr_[size_++] = val; }
  public T get(int j)
    { return arr_[j]; }
 public void beADuck(int j)
    { arr_[j].quack(); } // ILLEGAL!!
    
  T[] arr_ = new T[10];
  int size_ = 0;
}

HoldItems<Duck> ducky =
          new HoldItems<Duck>();
ducky.add(new Duck("Daffy"));
Duck d = ducky.get(0);
```
Calling `quack()` on the generic type would be illegal, since the class is not allowed to assume anything about what types it might be used with, even if the only type we ever use our generic with is a type that supports that operation (in this case `quack()`). When you later compile the code that uses the generic, the compiler will ensure the code uses the generic's interfaces correctly. 

We can place restrictions on what types can be used with the generic. This is called *bounding*. Here is an example of bounding in C#.
```cs
interface DuckLike {
  public void quack();
  public void swim();
}

class HoldItems<T> where T: DuckLike {
  public void add(T val)
    { arr_[size_++] = val; }
  public T get(int j)
    { return arr_[j]; }
 public void beADuck(int j)
    { arr_[j].quack(); } // LEGAL!!
    
  T[] arr_ = new T[10];
  int size_ = 0;
}
```

#### Why do we need Parametric Polymorphism?
In languages like Java and C#, every class is implicitly derived from a built-in `Object` class. If that's the case, why don't we skip all this ugly `<syntax>` and just use inheritance-based (aka subtype) polymorphism for our generics? Well, consider the following example.
```cs
class Duck : Object {
  public void quack() {
    Console.WriteLine("Quack");
  }
  public void swim() {
    Console.WriteLine("Paddle");
  }
}

class HoldItems {
  public void add(Object val)
    { arr_[size_++] = val; }
  public Object get(int j)
    { return arr_[j]; }
	
  Object[] arr_ = new Object[10];
  int size_ = 0;
}
```
In this specific case, *any* object can be stored in `HoldItems`, and there's no way for us to control access to the class. So, we could add both a item of type `string` and one of type `Duck` to the container, since both are derived from `Object`. C# would also have no way of detecting a type error at compile time in case of an invalid cast either.
```cs
HoldItems items = new HoldItems();
items.add(new Duck("Daffy"));
items.add("more stuff"); 

string s = (string)items.get(0); // Should be illegal!
```

#### Specialization
Specialization is when we define a dedicated version of a function or class for a specific type. The dedicated version is used instead of the generic/templated version (for that type). Specialization enables custom versions of a class/function to handle special cases or improve efficiency.
```cpp
// C++ example of specialization

template<>
void sort(bool items[], int len)
{
  int n_false = 0;
  for (int i=0;i<len;++i) { if (!items[i]) ++n_false; }
  for (int i=0;i<n_false;++i) items[i] = false;
  for (int i=n_false;i<len;++i) items[i] = true;
}

template <typename T>
void sort(T items[], int len)
{
  // General version of the sort, e.g., quicksort
}

int main()
{
  bool bools[] = {true, false, false, true};
  sort(bools, 4); // uses specialized version!

  int ints[] = {17, 22, 3, 33, 4, -10};
  sort(ints, 6);  // uses generic version of sort
}
```

#### Parameteric Polymorphism in dynamic languages?
Well,  since we don't usually specify types for variables in dynamic languages, we can't really have "type-parameterized" classes or functions. However, dynamically typed languages allow us to use duck typing, which accomplishes a very similar thing. Here is an example in Python.
```python
def qsort(lst):
  if len(lst) <= 1:     # base case
      return lst

  pivot = lst[0]
  rest  = lst[1:]
  lessEq =  [x for x in rest if x <= pivot]
  greater = [x for x in rest if x >  pivot]
  return qsort(lessEq) + [pivot] + qsort(greater)

strs = ["b","c","a"]
ints = [1,5,3,2,4]

qsort(strs)    # ["a","b","c"]
qsort(ints)    # [1,2,3,4,5]
```

#### Classify That Langauge
Consider the following parameterized class and some code that uses it below.
```typescript
class StudyList<T> {
    private values: T[] = [];

    public constructor (values: T[]) {
        this.values = values;
    }

    public add(value: T): void {
        this.values.push(value);
    }

    public get(index: number): T {
        return this.values[index];
    }

    public studySession(): void {
        for (var v in this.values)
            v.study();
    }
}
...
// The Nerd class has a study() method.
const nerds = new StudyList<Nerd>([]);

nerds.add(new Nerd("Carey"));
nerds.add(new Nerd("Paul"));
nerds.studySession();
```
The code results in a compiler error
```console
TypeError: v.study is not a function
```
Is the languages using templates or generics?

Generics! This is because even though the `Nerd` class has a `study()` method, the code does not compile. If this were a template, a version of `StudyList` would be generated with `T=Nerd` and this should work just fine.
{: .note }
This language is TypeScript!
